\section{Limitations and Future Work}
\label{sec-future}

\XXXnote{GWA: Street parking!}

\XXXnote{GWA: Better rate estimation using historical data.}

PocketParker presently bases its parking preditions on a fifteen-minute 
limited rolling window of recent parking events. We do not presently tap the
benefit of daily and weekly patterns that would otherwise enhance predictive
accuracy, but hope to do so in the future. Maintaining a database of
previously collected historical data from our own application will increase
the sample size and hence statistical accuracy of our parking preditions.
Integration of ParkerPocket with an existing mobile navigation solution such
as Google Maps would increase exponentially the data we can tap and the
accuracy benefits users receive.

Historical data will also address a present fundamental limitation:  the
situation of a lot that fills abruptly, a typical occurence on academic
campuses during class changes. Basing a negative recommendation about a
particular lot's availability solely upon recently acquired unsuccessful
searches implies that a time lag necessarily exists between when users start
discovering on their own that a lot is full and when we have collected enough
data to conclude and somewhat belatedly recommend that a lot is an unwise
option. Access to historical data will dissolve this limitation immediately:
using previous trends, we can time parking advisories for particular lots
before they hit capacity.

An anticipated future enhancement of our appliction, adding solicitation of
a user's configured desired parking preferences, will also significantly
benefit from historical data. We will be able to suggest available lots to
end users based on proximity to logistically preferable but full lots. If a
user further furnishes insight into how long he is willing to wait for a
desired parking location, we can mine historical data for how long a user
in that situation will have to wait for a parking spot and make
recommendations accordingly.

... tie in with mapping application -- automatically retrieve labeled search
data i.e., lot preference


...will enhance accuracy, and hence credibility of the application, with end users...

\XXXnote{GWA: Integration into navigation software.}



labelled searches...

\XXXnote{GWA: Incorporating user preferences.}

\XXXnote{GWA: Discuss what happens if all lots are full.}

\XXXnote{GWA: Hierarchical decomposition of lots over time.}




